Langston Hughes (1902-1967) was a prominent Jazz Poet and member of the Harlem Renaissance. His poetry embodied black life and was written specifically for a black audience, transcribing his daily experiences in brief, emotive language.

An important feature of Jazz Poetry is its serendipity: the Jazz Poem is not planned for, it simply emerges, following the improvisations of the writer like a jazz musician experiments with instruments. Many works of Jazz Poetry, including much of Hughes’ work, counts as short form poetry.

In “Dreams,” Hughes presents two simple metaphors. Life without dreams is both “a broken-winged bird” and “a barren field / frozen with snow.” Each image is equally haunting: a bird without flight has no meaningful life to live, and a barren field cannot support life even after the seasons change.

In many ways, this poem is a warning: once a life loses its dreams, it is near-impossible to retrieve those dreams. The images in this poem are paradoxical, forcing the reader to consider if a life without dreams is life at all.

Concision: The poem is 8 lines and 33 words. Within this, the poem offers two stark images, each of which presents a similar metaphor, and each metaphor building a sense of irony and caution.
Concreteness: The poem’s central images are a flightless bird and a frozen, barren field. Each image invoked is haunting and absolute. One cannot help but consider a winter of the soul.
Ephemerality: The poem’s brevity highlights the fleeting nature of dreams, and the imperative to hold them as tight as possible.
Simplicity: The language of the poem is clear and accessible. It is structured so that an image and metaphor are presented in two sets of four lines, and when juxtaposed, those images reinforce each other.
Literary Devices: “Dreams” makes powerful use of metaphor, juxtaposition, and paradox.
OLD POND
BY MATSUO BASHŌ
An old silent pond…
A frog jumps into the pond,
splash! Silence again.

“Old Pond” is a beautiful, striking poem—but much of that beauty is lost in translation. The haiku, like many short poems, is near-impossible to translate meaningfully, so some background is necessary here.

Matsuo Bashō (1644-1694) was a prominent poet of Japan’s Edo period and is considered a master of the haiku form. Haiku were used to summarize a longer passage of prose, often acting as prologue to larger works.

Additionally, the haiku tradition often involves reminiscences about nature, juxtaposing two images before linking them in some surprising way. Bashō’s haiku combine Japanese symbolism with his own experiences travelling through the wilderness.

Although it’s not apparent in the poem’s word choice, “Old Pond” is actually about the changing of the seasons. In Japanese poetry, frogs symbolize the springtime; here, a frog (Spring) jumps (suddenly arrives) into an old silent pond (Winter). In other words, the frog is breaking the ice over an immobile pond, and the “splash!” is both a literal and symbolic celebration. Winter is truly over; the world rejoices.

The “silence again” leaves the haiku open-ended. Different translations of the haiku don’t include this part, and it may have been written to adapt the poem to 5/7/5 syllables in English. Nonetheless, “silence again” might suggest the dead quiet of the coming summertime, or else the quickness with which seasons change before the long quiet of Winter.

Concision: The poem is 3 lines and 17 syllables, which is common of most haiku (though variations exist in translation and among different poetry schools).
Concreteness: The poem provides a simple concrete image: a frog splashing in water.
Ephemerality: “Old Pond” focuses on a brief moment in time, using this moment to signify the passing of seasons.
Simplicity: Bashō’s haiku is written and translated in accessible language, using a clear image to represent a global idea.
Literary Devices: In keeping with the haiku tradition, “Old Pond” makes use of symbolism to tell a story.
